Gingivitis means inflammation of the gums.
It most commonly develops in response
to the biofilm called plaque,
which is made up of bacteria.
When the plaque is allowed to build up,
it attracts more types of bacteria.
Over time, it hardens at the base of
the teeth into a material called tartar.
The plaque and tartar irritate the gums.
The immune system sends white blood cells
to fight the bacteria,
and the gums become inflamed.
Active inflammation may contribute
to formation of clots in blood vessels.
Bacteria entering the blood stream
activate platelets and increase clotting factors,
which work with platelets to form blood clots.